---
layout: post
title: "Swift Closures"
date: 2017-10-26
tags: psc
categories: ios
imageid: ios.jpg
listHide: correct
---

Closures are defined as 
> self contained blocks of functionality that can be passed around and used in your code. They're similar to blocks in C or lambdas in other languages.
> Closures can capture and store references to any constants and variables from the context in which they are defined. This is known as closing over those constants and variables. Swift handles all of the memory management of capturing for you.

The simplest version of a closure is a global function. They are defined, self-contained and can be passed around by name to other parts of code. They do not however, capture values from their context unless explicitly passed as parameters.
Nested functions have a name and can capture values from their enclosing function.
Closure expressions are unnamed closures that can capture values from their surrounding context - i.e. unnamed functions that capture values from their surrounding context.

Global functions exist in almost all modern programming languages, as do nested functions. Closure expressions however, are rarer.

### Closure Expressions

Initially reading closures, it feels counterintuitive - why write a function that you can use again? The example given however makes things clearer. 

The swift library contains a sorted method (```sortetd(by:)```) which sorts an array of a known type, based on a determined requirement. For example, to sort an array of names in reverse order we can define a function that return true if a name comes after another in the alphabet:
```swift
func backward(_ s1: String, _ s2:String) -> Bool {
    return s1 > s2
}
// then call pass the function to sorting
var reversedNames = names.sorted(by: backward)
```
However, given the func backward is so small, it can be converted to a closure and simply passed to ```sortd(by:)```:
```swift
reverNames = sorted(by: { (s1:String, s2: String) -> Bool in 
    return s1 > s2
})
```
We can shorten this further using swift type inferrence:
```swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { s1, s2 in return s1 > s2 })
```
And in fact we can shorten this even further by using Swift's implicit returns, to omit the ```return``` statement.

The immediate problem with the above is readability can be affected if the closure is long. Writing the function and then simply calling takes no extra time, as you're writing the closure statements anyway, and gives the added benefit of an appropriate name.
Using the example above, 
```reversedNames = names.sorted(by: alphabetically)``` is more readable than
```reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { s1, s2 in s1 < s2 } )```. Variable names can be as good as comments in some code and choosing not to use them should deliver some pretty big benefits in other ways.

### Escaping Closures
Escaping closures are a very interesting language feature. Consider this example:
```swift
var completionHandlers: [() -> Void] = []
// We declare an array of references (or pointers) to functions of type '() -> Void'

func someFunctionWithCompletionHandlers(passedCompletionHandler: @escaping () -> Void) {
    completionHandlers.append(passedCompletionHandler)
}
```
Our function takes a closure and appends that closure to the completionHandlers array declared outside the function. Consider though that a closure should not be used outside its function. By prepending the closure with @escaping, we can append it to the array and use it outside the function.

